Download Link: https://assignmentchef.com/product/solved-ece-411-mp-1-the-rv32i-processor-altera-quartus-tutorial
<br>
1 IntroductionWelcome to the first ECE 411 RISC-V Machine Problem! In this MP we will step through the design entry and simulation of a simple, non-pipelined processor that implements a subset of the RV32I instruction set architecture (ISA). This tutorial (along with material on the course web page) contains the specifications for the design. You will follow the step-by-step directions to create the design and verify it using dynamic simulation.The primary objective of this exercise is to give you a better understanding of multicycle micro-architectures, and of the RISC-V 32i ISA. Additionally, you will learn how to use Altera Quartus software to synthesize your design for an FPGA, and continue using ModelSim to verify your design. Since your next MPs will require original design effort, it is important for you to understand how these tools work now so that you can avoid being bogged down with tool-related problems later.The remainder of this section describes some notation that you will encounter throughout this tutorial. Most of this notation should not be new to you; however, it will be worthwhile for you to reacquaint yourself with it before proceeding to the tutorial itself. Section 2 contains a brief description of the relevant instructions in the RV32I instruction set. Section 3 contains a high-level view of the design. Section 4 is the step-by-step procedure for entering the design of the processor using Altera Quartus. Section 5 covers the simulation of the design using ModelSim. Section 7 contains the items you will need to submit for a grade, as well as what is due for Check Point 1, and what is due for the Final handin. Also included are several appendices that contain additional useful information.As a final note, read each and every word of the tutorial and follow it very carefully. There may be some small errors and typos. However, most problems that past students have had with this MP came from missing a paragraph and omitting some key steps. Take your time and be thorough, as you will need a functional MP1 design before working on future MPs.1.1 NotationThe numbering and notation conventions used in this tutorial are described below:• Bit 0 refers to the least significant bit.• Numbers beginning with 0x are hexadecimal.• [address] means the contents of memory at location address. For example, if MAR = 0x12, then [MAR] would mean the contents of memory location 0x12.• For RTL descriptions, pattern[x:y] identifies a bit field consisting of bits x through y of a larger binary pattern. For example, X[15:12] identifies a field consisting of bits 15, 14, 13, and 12 from the value X.• A macro instruction (or simply instruction) means an assembly-level or ISA level instruction.• Commands to be typed at the terminal are shown as follows:$ commandDo not type the dollar sign; this represents the prompt displayed by the shell (e.g., [<a href="/cdn-cgi/l/email-protection" class="__cf_email__" data-cfemail="d6b8b3a2bfb296babfb8a3aefbb7e4">[email protected]</a> ~]$).• Filenames are shown in italics.• Signal names are shown in fixed width.• Actions to take in the GUI are shown in bold.2 TheRV32Iinstructionsetarchitecture2.1 OverviewFor this project, you will be entering the SystemVerilog design of a non-pipelined implementation of the RV32I instruction set architecture. Because RV32I is a relatively simple load-store ISA with a robust toolchain published under GPL, it is a natural choice for our ECE 411 projects. The RISCV specification was created to be a free and open alternative to other popular ISAs and includes a 64 bit variant (and plans for 128 bit) and many extensions for atomic operations, floating point arithmetic, compressed instructions, etc. For this MP, you will implement all of the RV32I instructions with the exception of the FENCE∗, ECALL, EBREAK, and CSRR∗ instructions.Instructions are fixed width and 32 bits in length, having a format where bits [6:0] contain the opcode. The RV32I ISA is a Load-Store ISA, meaning data values must be brought into the General-Purpose Register File before they can be operated upon. Each general-purpose register (GPR) is 32 bits in length, and there are 31 GPRs total, as well as the register x0 which is hardwired as constant 0.The memory space of the RV32I consists of 232 locations (meaning the RV32I has a 32-bit address space) and each location contains 8 bits (meaning that the RV32I has byte addressability). Due to the limitations of Modelsim, we will only be able to utilize a fraction of this 4GB memory space.The RV32I program control is maintained by the Program Counter (PC). The PC is a 32-bit register that contains the address of the current instruction being executed.

Figure 1: RV32I instruction formatsDetailed descriptions of all RV32-I instructions may be found in the RISC-V Instruction Set Manual. Detailed encodings for each instruction can be found in this table.2.2 Memory InstructionsData movement instructions are used to transfer values between the register file and the memory system. The load instruction (LW) reads a 32-bit value from the memory system and places it into a general-purpose register. The store instruction (SW) takes a value from a general-purpose register and writes it into the memory system.The format of the load instruction, or LW, is shown below. The opcode of the LW instruction bits [6:0]) is 0000011. The effective address (the address of the memory location that is to be read) is specified by the rs1 and imm[11:0] fields. The effective address is calculated by adding the contents of the rs1 to the sign-extended imm[11:0] field.

The format of the store instruction, SW, is shown below. The opcode of this instruction is 0100011. As with the load instruction (LW), the effective address is the memory location specified by the rs1 and imm[11:0]. The effective address is formed in the same manner as that of the LW except that offset bits imm[4:0] come from the rd part of the instruction instead of the rs2 portion. This is to ensure that the signals for selecting which register index to read from or write to are not dependent on what the instruction opcode is.

2.3 Arithmetic InstructionsRV32I has nine register-immediate integer instructions: ADDI, SLLI, SLTI, SLTIU, XORI, SRLI, SRAI, ORI, and ANDI. These instructions represent addition, logical left shift, set less than (signed) comparison, set less than unsigned comparison, bitwise exclusive disjunction, logical right shift, arithmetic right shift, bitwise disjunction, and bitwise conjunction, respectively. The encoding format for these instructions is shown below. Note that SRLI and SRAI share the same funct3 code, so you must look at the funct7 portion of the instruction to determine which is which. SLTI and SLTIU will write a value of 1 or 0 to rd depending on if the comparison is true or false, respectively. Each instruction operates on rs1 and the I-type immediate. For comparison and shift, rs1 represents the left side of the operator and the immediate represents the right side of the operator (the shift amount).

Additionally, RV32I has several register-register integer computational instructions.2.4 Control instructionThe RV32I branch instructions, BEQ, BNE, BLT, BGE, BLTU, BGEU, cause program control to branch to a specified address if the relationship between the first and second operand is equal, not equal, less (signed), greater-or-equal (signed), less (unsigned), or greater-or-equal (unsigned), respectively. When the branch is taken, the address of the next instruction to be executed is calculated by adding the current PC value to the B-type immediate.

Additionally, RV32I supports two unconditional branching instructions which are used to create call and return type operations, as well as implement function pointers. These are the JSR and JSRR instructions.2.5 U-type InstructionsThe load upper immediate instruction, LUI, puts a 20 bit immediate into the most significant bits of the destination register, leaving the rest as zeros. Combined with ADDI, you can place any arbitrary 32 bit value into a RISCV register. The add upper immediate PC instruction, AUIPC, adds a 20 bit immediate (also padded with 12 zeros in the least significant bits) to the PC and saves that value in the destination register.

3 Designspecifications3.1 SignalsThe microprocessor communicates with the outside world (e.g., the memory) through an address bus, read and write data buses, four memory control signals, and a clock.3.1.1 Top level signalsclkA clock signal, all components of the design are active on the rising edge mem_address[31:0]Memory is accessed using this 32-bit signal mem_rdata[31:0]32-bit data bus for receiving data from memory mem_wdata[31:0]32-bit data bus for sending data to memory mem_readActive high signal that tells memory that the address is valid and that the processor is trying to perform a memory read.mem_writeActive high signal that tells memory that the address is valid and that the processor is trying to perform a memory write.mem_byte_enable[3:0]A mask describing which byte(s) of memory should be written on a memory write. If the MSB is high, the high byte location will be written. If the LSB is high, the low byte location will be written. If both are high, both locations will be written, etc.mem_respActive high signal generated by memory indicating that the memory has finished the requested operation.3.2 Bus control logicThe memory system is asynchronous, meaning that the processor waits for the memory to respond to a request before completing the access cycle. In order to meet this constraint, inputs to the memory subsystem must be held constant until the memory subsystem responds. In addition, outputs from the memory subsystem should be latched if necessary.The processor sets the mem_read control signal active (high) when it needs to read data from the memory. The processor sets the mem_write signal active when it is writing to the memory (and sets the mem_byte_enable mask appropriately). mem_read and mem_write must never be active at the same time! The memory activates mem_resp when it has completed the read or write request. We assume the memory response will always occur so the processor never has an infinite wait.3.3 ControllerThere is a sequence of states that must be executed for every instruction. The controller contains the logic that governs the movement between states and the actions in each state. In the RV32I, each instruction will pass through the fetch and decode states, and once decoded, pass through any states appropriate to the particular instruction.4 DesignentryNote: If you do not have an EWS account, please contact one of the TAs and he or she will help you obtain an account.The purpose of this MP, as stated before, is to become acquainted with the RV32I ISA and with the software tools. You will be using Quartus II from Altera to lay out designs and ModelSim to simulate them for the remainder of the semester, so it is important that you understand how to use the tools.Note: If you wish to learn more about the features in Quartus, you can go through the Quartus tutorials, which is available through Quartus itself (click on Help). These tutorials may cover additional topics not covered here.To run Quartus from an EWS Linux machine, run$ module load altera/18.1-std &amp;&amp; quartusTo work remotely, use the ‘-X’ option over ssh to enable X-forwarding.To get the provided base code for MP1, from your ece411 MP directory, run$ git fetch release$ git merge –allow-unrelated-histories release/mp1 -m “Merging MP1”Separately, /class/ece411/software in the EWS filesystem contains software that will be used throughout the semester• scripts/rv_load_memory.sh: script to generate memory.lst file from .asm test code for use in testbench memory.• riscv-tools/bin/riscv32-unknown-elf-*: a GCC-style toolchain for RV32. as is the assembler, ld is the linker, gcc will assemble and link and of course it can even compile C code.• scripts/rereference.sh: script to aid in renaming projects by renaming files and replacing textual references.• README: details of the executables are found hereTo begin work on the MP, set up your environment and open Quartus:$ ECE411_SOFTWARE=/class/ece411/software$ export PATH=$PATH:$ECE411_SOFTWARE/riscv-tools/bin:$ECE411_SOFTWARE/bin $ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH:$ECE411_SOFTWARE/lib64:$ECE411_SOFTWARE/riscv-tools/lib$ export PYTHONPATH=$PYTHONPATH:$ECE411_SOFTWARE/python2.7/site-packages $ module load altera/18.1-std &amp;&amp; quartus &amp;Note: If you don’t want to run these commands every time, add the lines to your ~/.bashrc file. You will need to logout and login again for changes to take effect, or source your bashrc.In Quartus, use the “New Project Wizard” to create your MP1 project. Use your git repository’s MP1 directory as the project working directory. Name the project ‘mp1’. Create an empty project, and add all of the SystemVerilog files from the mp1/hdl directory. Under “Family, Device and Board Settings”, select the Stratix IV EP4SGX530NF45C4ESas your target device. Under ‘EDA Tool Settings”, select ‘Modelsim-Altera’ as your Simulation tool, and SystemVerilog HDL as the Format. Ensure that ‘Run gate-level simulation…’ is NOT checked.4.1 Beginning the designSome components for the RV32I have been provided for you. You will create several missing components, connect them together to form the datapath, and implement a controller to sequence the machine. Take a look at Appendix E.2 to get a feel for what components are provided and what components need to be created.Open up the datapath by double-clicking datapath.sv in the Files tab. The given datapath.sv file contains a couple of already instantiated components and a partial port declaration. You will need to create and instantiate additional components and declare additional ports to complete the design.4.1.1 Create the controllerNext, we create the controller for the processor as a state machine in SystemVerilog. A skeleton controller is given in control.sv which you can use to follow along in this section. The basic structure for a state machine can be written in the following manner:Listing 1: Basic state machine structureimport rv32i_types::*; /* Import types defined in rv32i_types.sv */module control(/* Input and output port declarations */);enum int unsigned {/* List of states */ } state, next_states;always_comb begin : state_actions/* Default output assignments *//* Actions for each state */ endalways_combbegin : next_state_logic/* Next state information and conditions (if any)* for transitioning between states */ endalways_ff @(posedge clk)begin: next_state_assignment/* Assignment of next state on clock edge */ end endmodule : control4.1.2 Connect the datapath and controllerThe mp1.sv file contains is the top-level module. The hierarchy of the project can be viewed under the Hierarchy tab. You need to connect the datapath and controller you just finished. To do this, follow a similar method as you did to connect components within the datapath. Declare the relevant internal signals and instantiate (and connect) the two modules. Finish the controller for all instructions by following the design in Appendices B, C, and D. You will have to figure out the design for several of the instructions, including the register-register integer computational instructions. After adding an instruction, try compiling your design and testing the newly added instruction.5 AnalysisandfunctionalverificationAfter the design has been entered, you will perform RTL simulation to verify the correctness of the design. We recommend that you test your design after adding each instruction.The main hvl file to use in simulation is mp1/hvl/top.sv. This file does several things:• it instantiates your MP1 design as the DUT;• it instantiates one of two testbenches which provide input stiumulus to the DUT;• it instanties an interface between itself, the testbench, the DUT, and memory, and generates a clock• it provides several halting conditions for your simulation;• it instantiates a ‘riscv_formal_monitor_rv32i’, which monitors the output as well as some of the internal state of the DUT and reports an error when the DUT outputs an incorrect value or enters an incorrect state.Two different testbenches are provided. To choose which one to instantiate in mp1/hvl/top.sv, set the TESTBENCH macro to either SRC or RAND.The SRC testbench drives the DUT by loading a program binary into memory, and executing the program. This testbench should largely remain unchanged, instead modify the tests by modifying the compiled program. We suggest using this testbench to execute simulations which use large amounts of branches and jumps.The memory model is provided as a behavioral SystemVerilog file magic_memory.sv. The model reads memory contents from the memory.lst file in the simulation/modelsim/ directory of your Quartus project. See Appendix A for instructions on compiling RISC-V programs and loading them into memory.The RAND testbench drives the DUT by executing a sequence of randomly generated instructions. This testbench can and should be modified, as we have only provided the code to test immediate arithmetic instructions. We suggest extending this testbench to support simulation of randomly generated register-register instructions, and load-store instructions.5.1 Testbench memory initializationSee Appendix A for how to load an assembly program into the design. Use the instructions to load the given test code in mp1/testcode/riscv_mp1testcode.s.5.2 Adding Testbench in QuartusUnder Assignments →Settings… add a new testbench with the following settings:Test bench name: topTop level module in test bench: topSimulation Period: Run Simulation until all vector stimuli are usedUnder the Test bench and simulation files section, add all of the files in the hvl directory. Click OK several times to save the settings.5.3 RTL simulation5.3.1 Verify EDA tool settingsUnder Assignments →Settings… select EDA Tool Settings on the left side pane. Make sure that ModelSimAltera is selected as the simulation tool with the format SystemVerilog HDL then click OK. Also, under Tools →Options… select EDA Tool Options and make sure the path to the ModelSim-Altera binary is /software/altera/18.1/modelsim_ase/linuxaloem. Now, upon initiating ModelSim simulation from within Quartus, Quartus will

Figure 2: Simulation optionsgenerate a Tcl script in the simulation/modelsim directory. Upon launching the ModelSim GUI, this Tcl script is executed.You can, of course, execute this Tcl script from the ModelSim shell as in MP0. Werecommend that you focusyour testbench efforts on creating useful text output from ModelSim, and use the waveform viewer as just another tool for debugging, not as your main verification tool.5.3.2 Run RTL simulationSelect Tools →Run Simulation Tool →RTL Simulation. Modelsim should open up and simulate the testbench for a short time. Status and error messages are displayed in the transcript pane at the bottom of the window. A prompt in the same pane allows you to enter commands for Modelsim. Before continuing with RTL simulation, we will first set some user interface options.Set the default radixWhen printing out waveforms and lists, you will need all your signals to be displayed in hexadecimal. To set ModelSim to always display your signals in hexadecimal, select Simulate →Runtime Options… under Default Radix, choose Hexadecimal and click OK to exit.Change to a fixed width fontTo change your default font, select Tools →Edit Preferences… Then, under the Window List section, select Wave Windows. Within the Font section, click treeFont in the left pane and then click Choose… Select your favorite fixed width font (e.g., fixed, Consolas, Courier New, etc), set a comfortable size and click OK until you return to the main Modelsim window.Set timeline time unit to nsSelect the Wave →Wave Preferences… Then, open the Grid &amp; Timeline tab and under the Timeline Configuration section, change the time units to ns. Click OK to save the changes. If you don’t see the Wave menu, click in the wave window first. Instead of the Wave menu, you can also click the blue icon near the bottom left of the wave window.

Figure 3: Grid and timeline optionsThere are multiple ways of viewing the functionality of your design, we introduce a few options here.5.3.2.1 Wave tracesIf the wave pane is not open already, select View →Wave to open it. To add signals to the wave, drag them from the structure and objects panes on the left side to the wave pane. For now, find the register file in your design (e.g., top →dut →datapath →regfile) and drag the data object (from the object pane) to the wave pane. You can also do it by right clicking on the signal and select Add Wave or using the shortcut Ctrl+W. Expand the newly created node by clicking the + sign to reveal the individual registers.At the prompt in the transcript window, type the following to restart the simulation and then run it for a specified amount of time.&gt; restart -f&gt; run 20000nsNote that you can combine commands on the same line by separating them with a semicolon, which will look like this.&gt; restart -f; run 20000nsAfter running the commands, you should see the wave window being populated with signal values. If you set the default radix correctly above, the values should be displayed in hexadecimal. You can change the radix of individual signals by right clicking the name of the signal and choosing a radix in the context menu.To add additional signals to the wave, simply drag them from structure and objects panes on the left. You can reorder signals by dragging their names in the wave pane. Signals can also be grouped or colored for easy viewing via the right-click context menu (Group… or Properties…).Once you are satisfied with the layout of the wave window, you can save the layout for future use by selecting File →Save Format… and specifying a location and name (the default name is wave.do). This will save the wave format as a Modelsim macro file. Next time you open Modelsim, type the following to run the macro file.&gt; do wave.do5.3.2.2 ListsLists give a textual representation of signals over time and can be used to view signal values at certain events. To open the list pane, select View →Listor type view list at the prompt. Signals can be added by dragging and dropping into the list pane. Drag the mem_address, mem_wdata,mem_write, and mem_byte_enable signals to the list window. Change the signal properties (select the signal name then select View →Properties…) so that all values are in the appropriate radix if necessary.By default, each time a signal in the list window changes, it generates a new entry in the list. For some signals, you may not want a new line every time its value changes. In this case, we only want our list to generate entries when we are actually writing to our memory (when mem_write becomes active). Therefore, we only want to trigger entries to be added to our list when mem_write changes. To accomplish this, select the mem_address, mem_wdata, and mem_byte_enable signals, choose View →Properties…, and select Does not trigger line.

Figure 4: The wave trace window5.3.2.3 Memory listsMemory lists allow us to view the contents of memory at the current point in the simulation. To see the memory list, select View →Memory List or type view memory at the prompt. Double click the memory that you want to view to show its contents. For now, choose the memory from the testbench. A new pane will open with the memory contents. To make the memory contents easier to read, right click in the memory pane and select properties, then change the address and data radix to hexadecimal and under Line Wrap choose to display 2 (or your favorite number) words per line.5.3.3 Testing your designWith the above tools, you should be able to verify the functionality of your design. You can use the RV32ISimulator to run any test code to determine the correct behavior for the code and see if the operation of your design matches the expected behavior. You should write your own test code in RISCV assembly to test corner cases that might occur in your design and load it into memory as described in Appendix A.In Modelsim, you can restart the current simulation by typing restart -f and run the simulation by typing run 2000ns (or a time interval of your choosing).

Figure 5: The lists window

Figure 6: The memory lists window6 TiminganalysisOnce the design is functionally correct, we need to make sure that timing requirements are met with respect to a given clock frequency. For this MP, the target frequency is 100MHz (10ns period).To begin the timing analysis, first compile your design by selecting Processing →Start Compilation (or press Ctrl+L). If you take a look at the compilation report under TimeQuest Timing Analyzer, you should see a lot of failures due to Quartus assuming your target frequency is 1GHz by default. Note: the failures will show up as list items whose names are red.Open up the TimeQuest Timing Analyzer by selecting Tools →TimeQuest Timing Analyzer. Double click Create Timing Netlist in the Tasks pane on the left to generate a timing netlist for analysis.

Figure 7: The TimeQuest Timing Analyzer6.1 Set constraints6.1.1 Set clock constraintSelect Constraints →Create Clock… from the menu bar and specify a clock with 10ns period. For Targets, click the ellipses to the right, then click List to get a list of ports.Select clk and add it to the list on the right side, then click OK. Note the SDC command field at the bottom of the Create Clock window. This command shows what constraint is being specified. Here you can type a command directly instead of navigating through the GUI. For now, click Run to create the constraint.To verify that your clock was created correctly, scroll down in the Tasks pane and double click ReportClocks under Diagnostics to generate a clock summary.It should show that clk is constrained to operate at 100 MHz. In the process, you should get a warning about clock uncertainty. To do this, select Constraints →Derive Clock Uncertainty… and click Run. The clock uncertainty is not calculated until you update the timing netlist.

Figure 8: Selecting clock to constrain

Figure 9: Specifying clock constraints

Figure 10: The clock report6.1.2 Set input and output constraintsIn addition to the clock constraint, input and output constraints to the top level ports must also be set. For simplicity, we will set all the input and output delays to zero. Select Constraints→SetInputDelay… and in the dialog set Clock name to clk, set Delay value to 0, under Targets type [all_inputs], and click Run.

Figure 11: Specifying input constraintsSelect Contraints →Set Output Delay… to set the output delays, the settings are the same as for input delays, except [all_inputs] is replaced with [all_outputs].

Figure 12: Specifying output constraints6.2 Write SDC fileAfter setting all constraints, double click Update Timing Netlist in the Tasks pane. Now save the SDC (Synopsys Design Constraints) file by double clicking WriteSDCFile… in the Tasks pane (you need to scroll all the way down in the pane), specify the SDC file name and then click OK. The SDC file contains the commands that we specified above. To edit the constraints (e.g., to change the clock period or to constrain additional input/output ports), you can either use the GUI (like above) or edit the SDC file directly.After the SDC File is written, it needs to be added to the project. Exit TimeQuest and select Project →Add/Remove Files in Project… in the main Quartus window. Choose the SDC file (by default it is named mp1.out.sdc) and add it to the project (make sure to look for “All Files” instead of only “Design Files” in the select file dialog).6.3 Run Timing AnalysisAfter adding the SDC file to the project, run timing analysis again by double clicking TimeQuest Timing Analysis in the Tasks pane (alternatively you can run the full compilation via Processing →Start Compilation). If all goes well, the Compilation Report should indicate that no timing constraints were violated.

Figure 13: Writing the SDC file

Figure 14: The timing analysis summary7 HandIns7.1 Check Point 1For CP1, you must submit a design with• all arithmetic computational instructions (immediate and register);• Load Word and Store Word memory instructions; • all conditional branch instructions (not JSR, JSRR);• Both U-type instructions (LUI, AUIPC).Additionally, you must submit a short RISC-V assembly program, mp1/testcode/factorial.s. Your program must be iterative. You must use load instructions to initialize registers. Reference the sample program located at testcode/riscv_mp1test.s for assistance with the example instructions you can use. The factorial program should be flexible to calculate any other integer factorials like 4!, 6!, 7!, etc. by changing only one variable. It does not have to handle 0! or negative factorials (which are imaginary, anyway). Like the sample program, your code must end in an infinite loop. This will make simulation a lot easier. Please see Appendix A for a description of how to load a program into your processor.7.2 FinalThe final handin requires you to complete the design by adding all missing instructions (with the exception of the instructions listed as not implemented in Section 2.1).7.3 AutograderThe autograder will test your design in two ways. First it will run many small tests that each target a very minimal amount of functionality but together they should cover nearly all functionality. This is the best way for the autograder to give you as much partial credit as possible for small bugs. The second method of testing will be a larger test code that will test that your design can successfully run larger sequences of instructions. No partial credit will be given for this larger test code but it will not test corner cases as thoroughly as the targeted tests.Additionally, certain tests may be witheld from you until the CP1 and Final due-dates. This means that you should not treat earlier autograding runs as your verification effort. You must verify your own design.Since generating a timing report requires significantly more compilation effort than compiling for simulation, the autograder will only do grade timing at the deadlines and 24 hours prior to the deadlines.Material from this machine problem will be used in subsequent MPs and may appear on exams. It is your responsibility to make sure that MP1 is complete and functioning correctly before proceeding with future MPs.8 GradingrubricItem Pts %Code 6 30Targeted Tests 7 35Larger Testcode 4 20Timing report 3 15Total 20 100A LoadingprogramsintoyourdesignTo load a program into your design, you need to generate a memory initialization file, memory.lst, that is placed into the simulation directory mp1/simulation/modelsim/ (this directory may need to be created if modelsim hasn’t been run yet). The rv_load_memory.sh script located in the /class/ece411/software/scripts directory can be used to do this.The rv_load_memory.sh script takes a RISCV assembly file as input, assembles it into a RISCV object file, and converts the object file into a suitable format for initializing the testbench memory. The script assumes that your project directory structure is set up according to the instructions in this document. If not, you’ll need to edit the paths for the memory initialization file and assembler at the top of the script. The default settings are shown below.# SettingsECE411DIR={path to your ECE411 git repo}DEFAULT_TARGET=$ECE411DIR/mp1/simulation/modelsim/memory.lstASSEMBLER=/class/ece411/software/riscv-tools/bin/riscv32-unknown-elfgccOBJCOPY=/class/ece411/software/riscv-tools/bin/riscv32-unknown-elfobjcopyOBJDUMP=/class/ece411/software/riscv-tools/bin/riscv32-unknown-elfobjdumpADDRESSABILITY=1To execute rv_load_memory.sh, you need to supply the name of a RISCV assembly file and, optionally, the location to write memory.lst.$ ./rv_load_memory.sh &lt;asm-file&gt; [memory-file]By default, the script places the output at ./mp1/simulation/modelsim/memory.lst. Note that you should specify the path to rv_load_memory.sh if you’re not already in the bin/ directory.For example, suppose we want to generate a memory initialization file from the program ./mp1/testcode/my-test.s and place the result in the default target path.$ cd ~/ece411/bin/$ ./load_memory.sh ~/ece411/testcode/my-test.sIf successful, you should see a message similar toAssembled ./mp1/testcode/my-test.s and wrote memory contents to./mp1/simulation/modelsim/memory.lst.B RTLThe tables in this section cover RTL for most of the controller states needed for CP1.B.1 FETCH processState Data Controlfetch1 MAR←PC load_mar←1;fetch2 while (mem_res MDR←M[MAR]; p == 0) load_mdr←1; mem_read←1;fetch3 IR←MDR; load_ir←1;B.2 DECODE processState Data Controldecode // NONE // NONE (Note that although there is no code here, realistically speaking an instruction needs time to be decoded so that the processor knows which branch to take and there is code in the next_state logic)B.3 SLTI instructionState Data ControlFETCHDECODEs_imm rd←rs1_out L+ 4; i_imm; PC←PC load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; cmpop←blt; regfilemux_sel←1; cmpmux_sel←1; rs1_addr←rs1B.4 SLTIU instructionState Data ControlFETCHDECODEs_imm rd←rs1_out L+ 4; i_imm; PC←PC load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; cmpop←bltu; regfilemux_sel←1; cmpmux_sel←1; rs1_addr←rs1B.5 SRAI instructionState Data ControlFETCHDECODEs_imm rd←rs1_out L i_imm; PC←PC+ 4; load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; aluop←alu_sra; rs1_addr←rs1B.6 other immediate instructionsState Data ControlFETCHDECODEs_imm rd←rs1_out L i_imm; PC←PC+ 4; load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; aluop←funct3; rs1_addr←rs1B.7 BR instructionState Data ControlFETCHDECODEbr PC←PC + (br_en ? b_imm :4); pcmux_sel←br_en; load_pc←1; alumux1_sel←1; alumux2_sel←2; aluop←alu_add; rs1_addr←rs1; rs2_addr←rs2B.8 LW instructionState Data ControlFETCHDECODEcalc_addr MAR←rs1_out + i_imm; aluop←alu_add; load_mar←1; marmux_sel←1;ldr1 while (mem_resp == 0)MDR←M[MAR]; load_mdr←1; mem_read←1;ldr2 rd←MDR; PC←PC + 4; regfilemux_sel←3; load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; rs1_addr←rs1B.9 SW instructionState Data ControlFETCHDECODEcalc_addr MAR←rs1_out + s_imm; data_out←rs2_out alumux2_sel←3; aluop←alu_add; load_mar←1; load_data_out←1; marmux_sel←1;str1 while (mem_resp == 0)M[MAR]←data_out; mem_write←1;str2 PC←PC + 4; load_pc←1; rs1_addr←rs1; rs2_addr←rs2B.10 AUIPCState Data ControlFETCHDECODEs_auipc rd←pc + u_imm; PC←PC + 4; alumux1_sel←1; alumux2_sel←1; load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; aluop←alu_add;B.11 LUIState Data ControlFETCHDECODEs_lui rd←u_imm; PC←PC + 4; load_regfile←1; load_pc←1; regfilemux_sel←2; rs1_addr←rs1C CPU(a) Control to datapath (b) Datapath to control

Name Typeload_pc logicload_ir logicload_regfile logicload_mar logicload_mdr logicload_data_out logicpcmux_sel pcmux::pcmux_sel_tcmpop branch_funct3_talumux1_sel alumux::alumux1_sel_talumux2_sel alumux::alumux2_sel_t

Name Typeopcode rv32i_opcodefunct3 logic [2:0]funct7 logic [6:0]br_en logicrs1 logic [4:0]rs2 logic [4:0]

regfilemux_sel regfilemux::regfilemux_sel_tmarmux_sel marmux::marmux_sel_tcmpmux_sel cmpmux::cmpmux_sel_taluop alu_ops(c) Control to memory (d) Memory to control

Name Typemem_resp logic(f) Memory to datapathName Typemem_rdata rv32i_word

Name Typemem_address rv32i_wordmem_wdata rv32i_word

Table 1: CPU connectionsD ControlD.1 Signals and defaultsName Default valueload_pc 1’b0load_ir 1’b0load_regfile 1’b0load_mar 1’b0load_mdr 1’b0load_data_out 1’b0pcmux_sel pcmux::pc_plus4cmpop funct3alumux1_sel alumux::rs1_outalumux2_sel alumux::i_immregfilemux_sel regfilemux::alu_outmarmux_sel marmux::pc_outcmpmux_sel cmpmux::rs2_outaluop funct3mem_read 1’b0mem_write 1’b0mem_byte_enable 4’b1111rs1_addr 5’b0rs2_addr 5’b0D.2 Control diagramSee Appendix B for control state actions.

Figure 15: The RV32I control state diagram — sufficient for most of CP1

28E DatapathE.1 SignalsName Type Origin Destinationclk logic input port PC, IR, regfile, MAR, MDR, mem_data_outload_pc logic control PCload_ir logic control IRload_regfile logic control regfileload_mar logic control MARload_mdr logic control MDRload_data_out logic control mem_data_outpcmux_sel pcmux_sel_t control pcmuxalumux1_sel alumux1_sel_t control alumux1alumux2_sel alumux2_sel_t control alumux2regfilemux_sel regfilemux_sel_t control regfilemuxmarmux_sel marmux_sel_t control marmuxcmpmux_sel logic control cmpmuxaluop alu_ops control ALUrs1 rv32i_reg IR regfile, controlrs2 rv32i_reg IR regfile, controlrd rv32i_reg IR regfilers1_out rv32i_word regfile alumux1, CMPrs2_out rv32i_word regfile cmpmux, mem_data_outi_imm rv32i_word IR alumux2, cmpmuxu_imm rv32i_word IR alumux2, regfilemuxb_imm rv32i_word IR alumux2s_imm rv32i_word IR alumux2pcmux_out rv32i_word pcmux PCalumux1_out rv32i_word alumux1 ALUalumux2_out rv32i_word alumux2 ALUregfilemux_out rv32i_word regfilemux regfilemarmux_out rv32i_word marmux MARcmpmux_out rv32i_word cmpmux CMPalu_out rv32i_word ALU regfilemux, marmux, pcmuxpc_out rv32i_word PC pc_plus4, alumux1, marmuxpc_plus4_out rv32i_word pc_plus4 pc_muxmdrreg_out rv32i_word MDR regfilemux, IRmem_address rv32i_word MAR output portmem_wdata rv32i_word mem_data_out output portmem_rdata rv32i_word input port MDRopcode rv32i_opcode IR controlcmpop branch_funct3_t control CMPfunct3 logic [2:0] IR controlfunct7 logic [6:0] IR controlbr_en logic cmp 29 control, regfilemuxE.2 Datapath diagram

Figure 16: The RV32I datapath diagram — sufficient for most of CP130